So that, you know, it's got to be aimed towards the degree or it can't be considered.
Now, I realize that there's economic demands on this, but these are students who were prepared to carry more than the load in order to get something extra that they wanted out of attending a university.
All right, let's go back and talk about the department.
When you came, Dale Leeper was the head of
what was in fact oceanography and meteorology.
Correct.
Describe him as the department head.
How did he lead?
He was very far sighted.
He saw these
concepts early on that things that were really essential like building up the research and keeping that going and encouraging people also he was pushing early on for a college of geosciences that he wanted to see this so that
specialized subjects such as oceanography, meteorology, geology, geophysics, geography and so on,
could develop and whilst we were under the College of Arts and Sciences that was rather difficult to do and because he brought a different approach to the university concept I feel that he
Which sometimes, and of course I didn't know all of this really, will get on the wrong side of some of the administrators.
Because it was this idea of, well, we've never done that before, and here we are, we're 70 plus years old university.
we really shouldn't change now.
And I see this and I've seen this over the time that I've been here that when I first came in 1960 that so many of the faculty were products of A&M in many different disciplines.
And now
If you have your final degree, whatever it may be, from A&M and have not been outside to get some experience of a few years to see how the rest of the world is getting on, it will be very difficult to do.
to stay on here.
And I think this is an essential approach for us if we are to become a really major university.
Have you ever heard any stories about who or how it was that employed Dr. Leeper in the first place?
Somebody must have had some vision there because of his discipline.
Have you ever heard any?
That's very interesting, Haskell.
No, I have not.
I may have done years ago and forgotten them.
I would certainly suggest Bob Reed.
I'll try to chat with him.
Or Dale Leeper when he comes here.
Now, Dale, when he was hired, was in what department?
Do you know?
He came and formed the Department of Oceanography.
Yes.
So somebody then, and this is
1949, yes.
So it's before anybody that you and I know.
It's before Calhoun.
and so forth.
Okay.
It's been before.
Harry Conkroy might have heard of it, you know, but I feel sure that in the early years Bob Reed would have known about this because they employed Bob Reed.
He will be the best bet.
After you got here, how were important decisions made?
Did the department head make them, or was there a formal faculty consultation?
There were consultations, but
By the time I arrived, you see, we had a section of meteorology, and as I said, that was led by Dr. Moyer, and we would have faculty meetings about this.
We have always had heads of sections or head of the department
who have called faculty meetings, usually on a fairly regular basis, to apprise us of what's going on and what's come out of executive committee meetings and this sort of thing, and for the department to make a decision on this.
It, like democracy in general, has its
Numerous pluses, but it also has some minuses in that respect.
As you look back, what were some of the most important positive decisions that have been made regarding the discipline of meteorology since you arrived?
I think first of all in becoming wide-ranging because although we can talk about meteorology, that's the subject, like everything else it has many sub-disciplines within it and we have tried to keep
a wide range in that respect, covering things such as, well, in my own case, the applications, radar, forecasting, many different facets of the subject.
And so we have tried to
employ the best people we could in that field if somebody retires or as in most disciplines aspects developed that weren't thought of ten years ago and we tried to bring people in in those fields.
One that's growing now growing apace is atmospheric chemistry.
and it wasn't until a few years ago that we had anybody in atmospheric chemistry.
I was sorry to see, because of my own interest, that we never took on anybody to replace the hydrometeorologist that we had, Dr. Clark, when he left.
And so the other feature, of course, and it is very, very
confusing really is changes in the curriculum, what courses should we bring in and this type of thing.
The core curriculum came in for the undergraduate so things were decided upon there.
We have also a core curriculum in the graduate courses which makes things very difficult because I feel we have too many required courses leaving few for the student to be able to take who has to get out of here in a finite time.
I think also another important thing that has sometimes been overlooked but it would have redounded to our discredit if it had gone wrong was the building, the new building which we went into in May 73 and we were all given a chance to have an input in there and Dr Moyer who was sort of the faculty supervisor of this did a stalwart job in seeing that
as far as he could tell the building was constructed in a way that suited our needs and so that you see has kept on for more than 25 years now we're getting the benefits still of having a fine building which can attract new faculty members and we all had a say in that which I think was perhaps
as important as the faculty whom we chose.
Can you think of, again with the clarity of hindsight, can you think of any decisions that were made that now went negative?
made a mistake obliquely I've just mentioned it and this is this core curriculum and I think what happened was that at a certain time about
starting 10 years ago because of the ages of the faculty that had been taken on in the early years we had a large portion of our faculty retiring over a very short period and so we took on some younger members of the faculty
all of whom I would say were outstanding people and have done very very well by the department and I've been privileged to work with them as colleagues but they brought the new broom in and we tended to
go back and walk a path that we had already tried and didn't lead to the Golden City and this core curriculum has, as we very often say, keeps coming back to haunt us and it's still being modified and I think we... I'm not against
the concept, but it mustn't be to all encompassing.
And so I think that that has perhaps slowed us down.
If I were to chat with a group of meteorologists with long experience at other institutions, other than you, who would they note as the outstanding members of the faculty here?
Oh, as I say, we had specialists in the field.
If we go back to the late 50s and 60s, A&M was a leader in the field of radar.
And so we really had our name in the meteorology section because of the radar.
And in fact the big tornado in Waco was seen on the radar and gave a clue to other people in other parts of the nation who took this and developed on it.
So that I think that the people who lead that, Dr. Moyer was in charge for quite a while.
Dr. Huebner, who was an electrical engineer and joined the faculty, they have been very important in this field.
We had quite a name in the forecasting field
the late Professor Henry whom I've mentioned, Dr. Thompson had a lot to do with this and I think that of the more recent people I would have to quote Dr. Zipzer who left us to go to Utah
as head of department there and he was outstanding in organising large international groups and I was very admiring of his energy in this respect and his ability we have of course Dr North and Dr Wilhite currently who are well known with regards to satellite
surveying and Dr. Orville who is a sort of lightning expert helped develop the network that now is in place across the United States and
we have younger members that are making their name and we have now become a certainly a more research oriented department and I looked with some envy in the last few years of the
teaching loads that the young people had and they would complain if they had to take two courses in a semester.
But, because I felt that we were losing the rapport with the students.
And another thing that I should mention, I think, is that in the old days, notice I didn't say good old days, but the old days, we used to have
more social interaction, both within the confines of the campus and certainly outside.
And I really felt that this helped.
We got to know one another, not just as fellow scientists.
Nowadays
There isn't this feeling.
There just doesn't appear to be the opportunity.
You get emailed from your colleague next door.
You don't sit down and
have a cup of coffee or cup of tea with them.
And they are almost literally glued to the computer and I get to know the back of their heads better than their front.
And whilst this enables a lot of information to be taken in, I'm not certain that the breadth of it
is a good substitution for the depth of knowledge and understanding I suppose we have to go through this phase but I think the people who and even before my time in the 20s and 30s and 40s they worked at a topic like the dog with the bone and they might publish
an article after 10 years and it was an outstanding article.
And now that sort of luxury, I suppose, is not readily available to a great number of people.
And I believe that that's a bit of a negative.
The administrators outside the department, the college,
At first, the department was in, when you came, was in Arts and Sciences.
Correct.
And Frank Hubert was the dean.
Give examples of how he related to the department.
Do you remember his coming to visit?
Did he seem to understand the department and so forth?
At that time in my career here, all we had was the trickle down from the head of department who met with the dean.
I met with the dean a few times, especially when I came on campus, and once or twice socially, and that seemed to be it.
I don't think
And I can understand why.
I mean, we're all creatures of the environment in which we develop to a great degree.
We may absorb some things like I'm trying to absorb computers now, but it's really, to be honest, a veneer.
It's not a great depth of understanding.
That he didn't, it wasn't fully understood.
what Dr. Lieber, for instance, was trying to get at.
And there was room for more research and so on.
I suppose this is the ultimate aim now.
We're getting nearly all research.
And I feel that the emphasis on the teaching is perhaps there in the way that many administrators speak.
But the reality is that it's the research that counts.
All right.
And Wayne Hall was the Vice President in those days, Vice President of Academic Affairs.
Then the first dean is Dr. Zener?
Well, you see, when we split, we had, as dean,
Dr. Myers.
I'm sorry, Horace Byers.
Yes.
Horace Byers.
An outstanding meteorologist, and who was there starting in the late 20s.
He unfortunately died, I think last year, he and his wife both died.
And he came from Chicago, was a leader in understanding of the weather situations and this type of thing, the fundamentals.
And his ability of an administrator was noticed too early on, so that he went and became Vice President of Academic Affairs.
Then we had another fine person, of course, Dr. Calhoun.
Let's back up to Dr. Who identified him?
How did the leadership know to zero in on this target?
Did you all recommend him?
No.
No, we heard about it.
I remember Dr. Moyer coming and saying, and he said that there had been rumors that Dr. Byers was not too pleased with the way things were going at the University of Chicago, and that
I've heard two tales, and I cannot tell you which is right, that he, Dr. Byers, had applied for the position, or that someone, most likely, but somebody who was more knowledgeable than I should confirm or refute this, Dale Leeper, suggested that he apply for the post.
And, of course, when he came, I understood that the administration was shocked by the fact that he was going to be paid $36,000 for a nine-month appointment.
But, at any rate, he came, and, of course, with a name like that, that really helped in here as a national academician, and so on.
Do you have the impression that a man of his stature coming
helped to solidify the decision to make it a separate college, or had that already been decided?
I think that had been decided.
It was decided, I gather, by the Texas Commission of Higher Education in about 1963 or 64.
All right, so that's under Earl Rudder and Wayne Hall.
Yes, I must admit I really did not know Wayne Hall at all.
Earl Rudder was a
To me, a marvelous gentleman.
We had the pleasure of knowing him quite a number of years, and I always found him so easy to speak to.
One could phone up, make an appointment, or he would phone and say, oh, can you come over?
somebody from Britain coming tomorrow, and I wonder if you can spare a bit of time to come and meet him and this sort of thing.
He was involving the lesser faculty, which was really appreciated there, and I found that cooperation all along.
I started up the Texas A&M Cricket Club, of course, as you may recall, and
we had the opportunity to go and play in Mexico City against the big athletic club down there at the game of cricket.
And I went to tell Dean Hannigan about this.
And he came forward with a few hundreds of dollars to say, well, this is very good international cooperation and so on.
And those things like
President Rutter, when we were trying to get somewhere to play our cricket game, I went to him and he said,
Well, what do you tell me and what little I know about cricket?
You don't tear up the field or anything like that, do you?
And I said, well, what about using the drill field?
Well, as you know, that was the holy of the holies in the early 60s, and I just couldn't believe it.
But we did.
We played most of our matches, all our matches, no, with a couple of exceptions, on that drill field.
And so they were being very helpful at that level.
which I really appreciate it.
I found this all the way through, actually, really, although now it is much more difficult to be able to get to talk to any in the administration.
All right, then move on chronologically with administrators.
Jack Williams becomes president and John Calhoun the vice president.
Did you have any feeling of their appreciation and respect for meteorology?
Oh yes, I think that also was a marvellous combination for us.
Certainly more intimate with Dr. Calhoun, we did know Dr. and Mrs. Williams
quite well socially and admired both of them very much and dr williams input into the university i think can never be forgotten president rudder was the right person at the right time jack williams was again we were followed by the right person at the right time and doing that over a number of years is very good fortune
Right now, I agree entirely with you on those.
I'm a deep admirer of both of them.
Can you give some examples of why you feel that way about the Williams?
The fact that they were so outgoing that there was no what we could call the England side to them.
They were completely natural people.
We've entertained them in our home here and
So capable, but so modest.
And also, you know, from examples when he said, oh, well, I'll get something going here, John.
He did.
I mean, that was it.
And I was a very, very, very small cog in a wheel.
But that's, yes, I had the greatest respect for both those gentlemen.
All right, then, since Williams, any other administrators that you think were very key to meteorology?
Other deans, other vice presidents, other presidents?
Oh, well, certainly with regards to our deans, Dean Cook, Dean Friedman, both unfortunately deceased.
we were very very fortunate.
Here were people who were not per se meteorologists but would give meteorology their share of the discussion time
And also what I admire very much, they both manage to keep up with their research and teaching at the same time as being dean, which in itself is a full-time job.
And it is very easy to work with someone for whom you have admiration.
Now let's see, of the deans,
Byers, Cook, Eaton.
Calhoun.
No, the Dean of Geosciences.
Yes, well, Calhoun was Dean of Geosciences.
Okay.
Have they tended all to be oceanographers except for Byers?
Oh, well, no, of course, Calhoun was an engineer, and then Cook and Friedman were both geologists, both geologists.
So there's been a variety?
Oh, there has been a very, very definite variety there.
Funding sources for your research, where did you get the money?
In the beginning, as I mentioned, we had monies from the mainly, in my own case, from the Army, the US Army.
Then there were the air pollution people.
I was also doing work on air pollution, especially in Houston and this sort of thing.
And then, of course, there's always the National Science Foundation that would come in for various
with various fundings that they were interested in and these have followed through and in later years as the National Climatic Data Center has developed then I will get research through their various programs that they had there through NOAA and its branches because as you are all too aware in the past
it's getting on for twenty years now.
There has been this emphasis on climate and climate change and so more money has been forthcoming.
And why I might seem a bit hesitant on this is if
When you get a little chance in here, we have listed all the research by a principal investigator and the sources, and the abbreviations for the sources take up two pages in this book.
So it has been very, very wide ranging.
Some people might have said, well you certainly kept your eyes open to find out where there was money.
And there's a grain of truth on that, of course.
For you personally, which was the most important source?
I really can't answer.
Let me put it like this.
It was very important for me to come here and have for perhaps the first 10 years the monies that came from the US military because it got me started.
Then I was able to move through to air pollution and funding from National Science Foundation on pure and applied climatology.
And then in these last few years I have found it most rewarding because
Again, speaking personally, which I suppose I should do today, I often felt one of these days I'm going to have to walk out, close this door and say, this is it.
I've enjoyed every moment.
On Monday mornings such as today, I always look forward to the week.
Gosh, there's things to do until I got this illness and then everything changed.
I had many data stored up through the years and studies that I wanted to complete and I felt, gosh, perhaps when I leave,
All that information was, we don't want all that, let's hide it away and leave it for the mice or just get rid of it.
With regards to the data, thanks to the National Climatic Data Centre employing me as their advisor in climate change and obtaining data and that around the world, we have been able to digitise
a lot of the relevant data and so that is rewarding.
There were also various studies that I wanted to carry out and I'm pleased to say that there are only really